Title: Migration, Environment and Climate Change Nexus in Nepal: Policy Brief [EN/NE] - ReliefWeb
Published: Wed, 30 Apr 2025 00:25:17 GMT
Source: ReliefWeb

Nepal

Migration, Environment and Climate Change Nexus in Nepal: Policy Brief [EN/NE]

IOM

Attachments

Download Report(PDF | 458.32 KB | English version)

Download Report(PDF | 833.51 KB | Nepali version)

BACKGROUND AND TRENDS

Climate change induced extreme events coupled with environmental degradation are leading to more displacement and involuntary migration increasing global vulnerability (IPCC, 2022). Scholars note that environmental and climatic factors often interplay with social, political, and economic forces to influence migration patterns (Mpandeli et al., 2020). Migration is a multi-causal phenomenon which makes it difficult to identify the degree to which movements are driven by environmental factors (Flavell et al, 2020). However, increasing bodies of research have shown the link between migration, environment and climate change (Hunter and Nawrotzi 2016; and Piguet 2021).

A regional study conducted in 2016 in Nepal, Bangladesh and Maldives concluded that uncertainties caused by climate change impacts on livelihood options were influencing human mobility (IOM, 2017). Another study conducted in 2024 in Nepal also confirmed this trend and revealed that migration, livelihood diversification, uptake of alternative livelihoods, intensive farming and integrated water management were the most common measures being taken by people to cope with the environmental stressors associated with climate change, environmental degradation and disasters (IOM and GoN, 2024).

Weather related disaster events are a major cause for displacement in Nepal: Between 2011-2021, 3.4 million were displaced and 245 disaster events were recorded in Nepal (IDMC and ADB, 2022). The UNFCCC notes that the adverse impacts of disasters and climate change on human mobility can be averted or minimized if concerted actions are prescribed under international law (UNFCCC, 2019).

A significant gap in discussing the securitization of climate change-induced migration is the consideration of gender dimensions (Resureccion et al., 2020). Literature on gender and climate change often overlooks migration issues. Both the pressure to migrate and the ability to migrate vary by gender and other intersecting aspects (IOM, 2014).

Migration offers both opportunities and challenges. When migration is safe, regular and orderly, it can contribute to economic growth and cultural exchange, fulfil labor shortages and support climate change adaptation. However, forced migration and displacement should be avoided.