Title: Research on Human Security-Centred and Gender-Responsive Migration, Environment and Climate Change in Nepal - ReliefWeb
Published: Fri, 03 Jan 2025 08:00:00 GMT
Source: ReliefWeb

Nepal

Research on Human Security-Centred and Gender-Responsive Migration, Environment and Climate Change in Nepal

IOM

Attachments

Download Report(PDF | 5.13 MB)

IOM Launches Report on Gender-Responsive Climate Migration in Nepal

Kathmandu –The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has launched an insightful research report exploring the intricate nexus between human security, gender dynamics, and climate-induced migration in Nepal. This study sheds light on the profound ways environmental changes are shaping human mobility patterns and presents actionable solutions to promote inclusive and sustainable development.

The report examines the impacts of both sudden and gradual environmental changes, illustrating how these phenomena drive forced and voluntary migration across Nepal's diverse communities. By focusing on the gendered impacts of migration, the research explores the unique challenges faced by women and those left behind, emphasizing the importance of reducing labour burdens and enhance resilience through climate-smart technologies and adaptive measures.

A key focus of the report is the inclusion of vulnerable groups, such as displaced persons and highly vulnerable households, in government-led development and climate adaptation initiatives. Their experiences provide valuable insights into the intersection of migration and equitable climate action, emphasizing the need for equity and empowerment in policy responses.

In addition, the report evaluates Nepal's existing policy framework highlighting best practices in managing human mobility amid environmental challenges. By offering a roadmap for strengthening national policies, the study paves the way for more effective and inclusive approaches to address climate-induced migration.

The research was carried out in close coordination and with technical working group comprising representatives from the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security, the Ministry of Forests and Environment, the Ministry of Federal Affairs and General Administration, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority and the National Planning Commission.

During the endorsement of the report, Minister Sharat Singh Bhandari, Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security, stressed on the importance of implementing the recommendations of the research. He remarked, “This research underscores the urgency of adopting human-security-centered and gender-responsive strategies to address the interconnected challenges of migration, environmental change, and climate resilience.”

As Nepal navigates the impacts of climate change, inclusive solutions are essential to ensure no one is left behind in the country’s development journey.

For more information about the report or to access the full publication, pleaseclick here.

For media enquiries, please contact: Dipina Sharma Rawal, Head of Migration, Environment and Climate Change at IOM Nepal,dsharma@iom.int