Title: Wildfires are raging in Nepal — climate change isn’t the only culprit - Nature
Published: Fri, 14 Jun 2024 07:00:00 GMT
Source: Nature

NEWS

14 June 2024

Correction05 July 2024

Wildfires are raging in Nepal — climate change isn’t the only culprit

Saugat Bolakhe0

Saugat BolakheSaugat Bolakhe is a freelance science journalist based in Washington DC.View author publicationsYou can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Saugat Bolakhe is a freelance science journalist based in Washington DC.

Saugat Bolakhe is a freelance science journalist based in Washington DC.

You can also search for this author inPubMedGoogle Scholar

Twitter

Facebook

Email

Firefighters, police officers and local residents try to extinguish a wildfire near the village of Lubhu in Lalitpur district, on the outskirts of Kathmandu, overnight on 1 May 2024. Credit: Prakash Mathema/AFP via Getty

Nepal’s wildfires are increasing in frequency and intensity, but it’s not just climate change to blame. Forest scientists say that Nepalis’ changing relationship with forests is also escalating the incidence of forest fire, but that better fire prediction and preparedness could minimize harm.

Access options

Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals

Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription

24,99 €/ 30 days

cancel any time

Subscribe to this journal

Receive 51 print issues and online access

185,98 € per year

only 3,65 € per issue

Rent or buy this article

Prices vary by article type

from$1.95

to$39.95

Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout

doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-01758-2

Updates & Corrections

Correction 05 July 2024: Binod Pokharel’s name was spelt incorrectly in a previous version of this article.

Correction 05 July 2024: Binod Pokharel’s name was spelt incorrectly in a previous version of this article.

References

Pokharel, B.et al.Clim. Change176, 17 (2023).ArticleGoogle Scholar

Pokharel, B.et al.Clim. Change176, 17 (2023).

ArticleGoogle Scholar

Download references

Reprints and permissions

Related Articles

India’s neighbours race to sequence genomes as COVID surges

India’s neighbours race to sequence genomes as COVID surges

Viruses in sewage help to pinpoint typhoid hotspots

Viruses in sewage help to pinpoint typhoid hotspots

Are these moths blinding children? Nepalese researchers seek answers

Are these moths blinding children? Nepalese researchers seek answers

Why is Latin America on fire? It’s not just climate change, scientists say

Why is Latin America on fire? It’s not just climate change, scientists say

Surge in extreme forest fires fuels global emissions

Surge in extreme forest fires fuels global emissions

Subjects

Software

Society

Forestry

Latest on:

How to protect research data

Nature Index30 APR 25

Which programming language should I use? A guide for early-career researchers

Technology Feature22 APR 25

These are the most-cited research papers of all time

News Feature15 APR 25

Eugenics is on the rise again: human geneticists must take a stand

Comment24 APR 25

Why US police shootings are so deadly ― and why some police forces do better

Research Highlight23 APR 25

Defend scientific integrity and academic freedom

Correspondence22 APR 25

Widespread slow growth of acquisitive tree species

Article19 MAR 25

Impact of Amazonian deforestation on precipitation reverses between seasons

Article05 MAR 25

Biodiversity impacts of the 2019–2020 Australian megafires

Article13 NOV 24

How to protect research data

Nature Index30 APR 25

Which programming language should I use? A guide for early-career researchers

Technology Feature22 APR 25

These are the most-cited research papers of all time

News Feature15 APR 25

Jobs

Scientist / Postdoc (m/f/d): Preclinical Metabolomics•	Studying the development and metabolism of lymph nodes through melanoma metastasisDortmund, Nordrhein-Westfalen (DE)Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

Scientist / Postdoc (m/f/d): Preclinical Metabolomics

•	Studying the development and metabolism of lymph nodes through melanoma metastasis

Dortmund, Nordrhein-Westfalen (DE)

Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

PhD Candidate (m/f/d): Preclinical MetabolomicsResearching oxidative stress within lymph nodes caused by metastatic melanomaDortmund, Nordrhein-Westfalen (DE)Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

PhD Candidate (m/f/d): Preclinical Metabolomics

Researching oxidative stress within lymph nodes caused by metastatic melanoma

Dortmund, Nordrhein-Westfalen (DE)

Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

Postdoc position at the crossroad of innate immunity and cancer research availableThis is a full-time postdoc position in an international team to lead a project at the crossroad of innate immunity and cancer.France (FR)IGBMC

Postdoc position at the crossroad of innate immunity and cancer research available

This is a full-time postdoc position in an international team to lead a project at the crossroad of innate immunity and cancer.

France (FR)

IGBMC

University Professor (m/w/d) for Behavioral Physiology (grade W3)The University of Würzburg is offering a position of a University Professor (m/w/d) for Behavioral Physiology (grade W3) (Chair of Zoology II).Würzburg (Stadt), Bayern (DE)Julius-Maximilians-University of Würzburg - Faculty of Biology

University Professor (m/w/d) for Behavioral Physiology (grade W3)

The University of Würzburg is offering a position of a University Professor (m/w/d) for Behavioral Physiology (grade W3) (Chair of Zoology II).

Würzburg (Stadt), Bayern (DE)

Julius-Maximilians-University of Würzburg - Faculty of Biology

Leading Medical Talents of ChongqingInternationally recognized research achievementsChongqing (CN)The Health System of Chongqing, China

Leading Medical Talents of Chongqing

Internationally recognized research achievements

Chongqing (CN)

The Health System of Chongqing, China